3103202416:35
tags: 
# B.Milewski Category Theory 1.1

If we take programming as an example, we can look at assembly. 
Assembly is a language where we have to tell exactly the computer what to do at each step, and this can be very exhausting when we want to build bigger programs.

Because of that we started to use higher level languages such as C++, along with the concept of object oriented programming, this kind of programming make a bunch of stuff of assembly **abstract** when we use the language in the day to day.
Another important part of programming is the fact that when we create a program, we usually cut the problem we want to solve in smaller problems and then compose them to solve the bigger one.
This is call **composability**.
With composability, comes **reusability**, we create small pieces that are more abstract but can be used in many programs (libs for example).
A good example of a time where we code in an abstract way is when we don't tell the type of the input in a function (using generics in Rust for example).

Some languages allow to be more abstract than others, for example CPP is much better at abstracting stuff than assembly, same could be told for Haskell and CPP.
And for every language, we can always find one that can help us be more abstract than the previous one.
The highest one is **Category Theory**. It is a language, but not a practical one.
### Philosophy of Category Theory
When you start abstracting enough, some things that were very different can look very similar. 

For example Rust and Haskell are completely different languages, but when you start to abstract enough, they are just two programming languages and could just be seen as the same thing, with minor twists. 

Same could be said for different theories of Mathematics such as algebra, set theory or any other. It could mean that we are not creating mathematics but discovering it. 

The ability for our brains to think abstractly is fairly new (cognitive revolution), and our brains are not made for that initially ()


---
## References
1. [[1. Fleeting notes/B.Milewski Category Theory 1.1|B.Milewski Category Theory 1.1]]