0804202408:13
tags: 
# Proofs, Args, ZK Session 4 

## GKR Protocol

The GKR Protocol is a general purpose IP system where the verifier can verify the proof in linear time (doing just a bit more than reading the output) and the prover will not do much more than solving the problem.

The protocol can be described as an arithmetic evaluation problem. The prover and verifier first agree on a circuit $C$ over $\mathbb{F}$ where the goal is to compute the output gates of $C$. It means that the verifier will be able to verify that for the circuit $C$, a certain set of inputs gives some output (given by the prover), without evaluating the circuit.
### Inputs of the protocol
- $C$ an arithmetic circuit of size $S$ (the total number of gates)
- $d$ is the depth of the circuit, with $0$ being the output layer, and $d$ the input layer.
- $S_i$ the number of gates at the $i$-th layer of $C$. Assume $S_i$ is a power of 2 and $S_i=2^{k_i}$

#### Wiring predicates
GKR uses the notion of **wiring predicates** that encodes which pairs of gates at the layer $i+1$ is connected at a certain gate at layer $i$ (for example a gate $a$ could be connected to $b$ and $c$ for example). It can be defined like this:
 $$in_{1,i},in_{2,i}: \{0,1\}^{k_i}\rightarrow\{0,1\}^{k_{i+1}}$$ For our example we would write: $in_{1,i}(a)=b$ and $in_{2,i}(a)=c$ 
### Functions of the protocol
Let $add_i$ and $mult_i$, the wiring predicates of the GKR protocol.
Specifically, these functions takes as $(a,b,c)$ as input and return $1$, if and only if $(b,c)= (in_{1,i}(a),in_{2,i}(a))$
These functions are circuit dependent. For example if a circuit has no addition every $add_i$ function will be a 0 function. 

Let $W_i:\{0,1\}^{k_i}\rightarrow \mathbb{F}$ denote the function that take a binary gate label as input and give the value of this gate at the layer $i$. 
$\tilde{W_i}$ denotes the multilinear extension of $W_i$ 
### Description of the protocol
The protocol consists of $d$ iterations, one for each layer of the protocol.
Each iteration starts with $\mathcal{P}$ claiming a value for $\tilde{W_i}(r_i)$ for some $r_i\in\mathbb{F}^{k_i}$. For the first iteration, this claimed is derived from the output of the circuit.

Let $D:\{0,1\}^{k_0}:\rightarrow\mathbb{F}$ denote the function that takes a label as an input and give the claimed output. $\tilde{D}$ is the linear extension. Due to the Schwartz-Limmel Lemma, we just have to verify if $\tilde{D}_0(r_0)=\tilde{W}_0(r_0)$ to be sure that the claimed outputs are valid.

But to compute $\tilde{W}_0(r_0)$, the verifier needs to evaluate the entire circuit, which he wants to avoid. Instead, we will reduce the claim $\tilde{W}_i(r_i)$ to a claim about $\tilde{W}_{i+1}(r_{i+1})$, and do this for every iteration, until the last layer, where the verifier can compute by himself $\tilde{W}$ based on the public inputs.

For doing so, we will use the sum-check protocol to prove this evaluation: $$ \tilde{W}_i(z)=\sum_{b,c\in\{0,1\}^{k_{i+1}}} \tilde{add}_i(z,b,c)\cdot(\tilde{W}_{i+1}(b)+\tilde{W}_{i+1}(c))+\tilde{mult}_i(z,b,c)\cdot(\tilde{W}_{i+1}(b)+\tilde{W}_{i+1}(c)$$
Basically, we use $add_i$ and $mult_i$ multilinear extensions as "selectors" for our evaluation, if the selector returns 1, it means we need to add it to the evaluation of the layer. It's the sum of every binary gate (see how $b,c$ are defined)

At the last layer we will be able to compute $\tilde{W}_d(r_d$) on our own to make sure the claims are valid.
#### Important note
The verifier does not know the polynomial $\tilde{W}_{i+1}$; hence he doesn't know the polynomial $f^{(i)}_{r_i}$ he is applying the sum-check protocol to, but it's not a problem because he doesn't need to know the polynomial until the last round of the protocol.

To be able to execute the last round, we proceed as follows:
$\mathcal{V}$ wants to execute $\tilde{W}_{i+1}(b*)$ and $\tilde{W}_{i+1}(c*)$ but cannot without evaluating the circuit. 
Instead he asks $\mathcal{P}$ to provide the values $z_1,z_2$, and he will use the next iteration of the GKR protocol to make sure these values are valid (since the next the next iteration will be about verifying some value of $\tilde{W}_{i+1}$).

But there's still a problem, we need to evaluate $\tilde{W}_{i+1}(b*)$ and $\tilde{W}_{i+1}(c*)$, but the next iteration only evaluates $\tilde{W}_{i+1}(r_{i+1})$. To solve this problem, we can reduce $\tilde{W}_{i+1}(b*)$ and $\tilde{W}_{i+1}(c*)$ [[Reducing Multiple Polynomial Evaluations to One|to a single value]]. 



---
## References
1. [[session 4 proofs args zkp]]